# 1 
## Introduction
^1^ From Paul, now a prisoner for Christ Jesus, and from Timothy, a fellow follower of the Lord. ^2^ To our dear friend and fellow worker Philemon, to our sister Apphia, to our fellow soldier Archippus; and to the church that meets at Philemon's house; ^3^ may God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ bless you and give you peace. ## Request regarding runaway slave


^4^ I always mention you in my prayers and thank God for you, ^5^ because I hear of the love and the faith which you show, not only to the Lord Jesus, but also to all his people; ^6^ and I pray that your participation in the faith may result in action, as you come to a fuller realization of everything that is good and Christlike in us. ^7^ I have indeed found great joy and encouragement in your love, knowing, as I do, how the hearts of Christ's People have been cheered, friend, by you. 

^8^ And so, though my union with Christ enables me, with all confidence, to dictate the course that you should adopt, ^9^ yet the claims of love make me prefer to plead with you — yes, even me, Paul, though I am an ambassador for Christ Jesus and, now a prisoner for him as well. ^10^ I plead with you for this child of mine, Onesimus, to whom, in my prison, I have become a father. ^11^ Once he was of little service to you, but now he has become of great service, not only to you, but to me as well; ^12^ and I am sending him back to you with this letter — though it is like tearing out of my heart. ^13^ For my own sake I should like to keep him with me, so that, while I am in prison for the good news, he might attend to my wants on your behalf. ^14^ But I do not wish to do anything without your consent, because I want your generosity to be voluntary and not, as it were, compulsory. ^15^ It may be that he was separated from you for an hour, for this reason, so that you might have him back for ever, ^16^ no longer as a slave, but as something better — a dearly loved friend and follower of the Lord, especially dear to me, and how much more so to you, not only as a person, but as your fellow Christian! ^17^ If, then, you count me your friend, receive him as you would me. ^18^ If he has caused you any loss, or owes you anything, charge it to me. ^19^ I, Paul, put my own hand to it — I will repay you myself. I say nothing about your owing me your self. ^20^ Yes, friend, let me gain something from you because of your union with the Lord. Cheer my heart by your Christlike spirit. ^21^ Even as I write, I have such confidence in your compliance with my wishes, that I am sure that you will do even more than I am asking. ^22^ Please also get a lodging ready for me, for I hope that I will be given back to you all in answer to your prayers. ## Messages
and Blessing 

^23^ Epaphras, who is my fellow prisoner for Christ Jesus, sends you his greeting; ^24^ and Marcus, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers, send theirs. ^25^ May the blessing of the Lord Jesus Christ rest on your souls. 